New rule: Visible focus (#1329)
act-rules/act-rules.github.io: _rules/sequentially-focusable-element-has-visible-focus-oj04fd.md

---
id: oj04fd
name: Element in sequential focus order has visible focus
rule_type: atomic
description: |
  This rule checks that each element in sequential focus order has some visible focus indication.
accessibility_requirements:
  wcag20:2.4.7: # Focus Visible (AA)
    forConformance: true
    failed: not satisfied
    passed: further testing needed
    inapplicable: further testing needed
input_aspects:
  - CSS styling
  - DOM tree
acknowledgments:
  authors:
    - Jean-Yves Moyen
---

## Applicability

> The rule applies to any element which is part of [sequential focus navigation][] in a document with at least two [focusable][] elements.

Reviewer: To make sure this applies to HTML documents

```suggestion
The rule applies to any element which is part of [sequential focus navigation][] in an [HTML document](https://html.spec.whatwg.org/#document) with at least two [focusable][] elements.
```

## Expectation

For each target element, there is at least one device pixel inside the [scrolling area][] of the [viewport][] whose color is different when the element is [focused][] from when it is not.

## Assumptions

> This rule assumes that documents with only one focusable element automatically satisfies [Success Criterion 2.4.7 Focus Visible][sc247], as stated in [Understanding Success Criterion 2.4.7: Focus Visible][usc247]: "if there is only one keyboard actionable control on the screen, the success criterion would be met".

Reviewer: ```suggestion
This rule assumes that documents with only one focusable element automatically satisfy [Success Criterion 2.4.7 Focus Visible][sc247], as stated in [Understanding Success Criterion 2.4.7: Focus Visible][usc247]: "if there is only one keyboard actionable control on the screen, the success criterion would be met".
```

> This rule assumes that documents with only one focusable element automatically satisfy [Success Criterion 2.4.7 Focus Visible][sc247], as stated in [Understanding Success Criterion 2.4.7: Focus Visible][usc247]: "if there is only one keyboard actionable control on the screen, the success criterion would be met".

Reviewer 2: The keyword here seems to be "keyboard actionable". It therefore seems like there's a disconnect between this assumption and the applicability of the rule as the latter requires at least two "focusable" elements in the document, not at least two "keyboard actionable" elements.

Reviewer: And given that @Jym77 has already created the definition for [keyboard actionable](https://github.com/act-rules/act-rules.github.io/blob/bf57d85c3f0514721dc70868506b3519a2e65bda/pages/glossary/keyboard-actionable-element.md) that should be an easy fix 🙂

Author: Interesting discussion…
I am not convinced that our "keyboard actionable" make sense here. If an element can be tabbed but not clicked, it still require focus indication. Typically, [HTML specs](https://html.spec.whatwg.org/multipage/interaction.html#data-model:sequentially-focusable) have an example where a UA could make bullets (the bullet symbol) in a list could be sequentially focusable as a reading guide, in which case they definitely need an indicator…

OTOH, WCAG (the SC) is only about "a keyboard operable UI component"… Not sure whether these bullets would be considered as a UI component by WCAG… But "operable" could be understand as "tabbable", if the only purpose is to be tabbable (reading guide, …)

Suggestion: put the applicability as "if there are at least 2 sequentially focusable elements" (rather than "at least 2 focusable)"; and add an assumption "this rule assumes that sequentially focusable elements are UI components", which sounds safe.
+ update all examples since the dummy button with `tabindex=-1` does not work any more 😕 

This would also avoid the need for "keyboard actionable" which is annoying to test automatically. So the Applicability could be automated, and the rule also in many cases (e.g., detecting an indicator through styling, …)

@carlosapaduarte @kasperisager WDYT?

Reviewer 2: Something along the lines of "if the sequential focus navigation order contains more than 1 element" works fine by me 👍

Reviewer: Agreed

## Accessibility Support

There are no major accessibility support issues known for this rule.

## Background

Default styling in most user agents is providing perfectly valid focus indication for focusable elements (even those that are not focusable by default), as shown in Passed Examples 1 and 2. Many examples in this rule need to **remove** that indicator in order to illustrate various situations. This is bad practice and should normally be avoided.

> WCAG does not have any requirement of how big or small focus indicator should be, or how far or near from the [focusable][] element it should be. Thus it is possible to pass this rule and [Success Criterion 2.4.7 Focus Visible][sc247] with barely perceptible changes at the other end of the page. That would however still be an accessibility issue. WCAG 2.2 includes [Success Criterion 2.4.11 Focus Appearance (Minimum)][sc2411] and [Success Criterion 2.4.12 Focus Appearance (Enhanced)][sc2412] specifying how big the focus indicator should be. All Examples in this rule avoid focus indications that are too small, too far away, too weak, …

Reviewer: Not sure what you're meaning by a "too weak" focus indicator... is it perhaps contrast related?

```suggestion
WCAG does not have any requirement of how big or small focus indicator should be, or how far or near from the [focusable][] element it should be. Thus it is possible to pass this rule and [Success Criterion 2.4.7 Focus Visible][sc247] with barely perceptible changes at the other end of the page. That would however still be an accessibility issue. WCAG 2.2 includes [Success Criterion 2.4.11 Focus Appearance (Minimum)][sc2411] and [Success Criterion 2.4.12 Focus Appearance (Enhanced)][sc2412] specifying how big the focus indicator should be. All Examples in this rule avoid focus indications that are too small, too far away, have low contrast, …
```

WCAG has no clear requirement of unicity of the focus indicator for each [focusable][] element. Therefore, this rule can pass even if several focus indicators are identical. Such a situation may nonetheless cause confusion and all Examples in this rule avoid it.

- [Success Criterion 2.4.7 Focus Visible][sc247]
- [Success Criterion 2.4.11 Focus Appearance (Minimum)][sc2411]
- [Success Criterion 2.4.12 Focus Appearance (Enhanced)][sc2412]
- [Understanding Success Criterion 2.4.7: Focus Visible][usc247]
- [Understanding Success Criterion 2.4.11: Focus Appearance (Minimum)][usc2411]
- [Understanding Success Criterion 2.4.12: Focus Appearance (Enhanced)][usc2412]

## Test Cases

### Passed

#### Passed Example 1

> The first [focusable][] element is part of [sequential focus navigation][]. It has an outline when it is [focused][] (due to default User Agent's styling). The second [focusable][] element is not applicable because it has been removed from [sequential focus navigation][] due to the negative value for the `tabindex` attribute. Its presence is nonetheless enough to make the first one applicable.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The first [focusable][] element is part of [sequential focus navigation][]. It has an outline when it is [focused][] (due to default User Agent's styling). The second [focusable][] element is not applicable because it has been removed from [sequential focus navigation][] due to the negative value for the `tabindex` attribute. Its presence is nonetheless enough to make the rule applicable to the first one.
```

```html
<a href="https://act-rules.github.io/">ACT rules</a> <button tabindex="-1">Dummy button</button>
```

#### Passed Example 2

The first [focusable][] element is part of [sequential focus navigation][]. It has an outline when it is [focused][] (due to default User Agent's styling).

```html
<span tabindex="0">Act rules</span> <button tabindex="-1">Dummy button</button>
```

#### Passed Example 3

> The first [focusable][] element, is part of [sequential focus navigation][]. Its parent `span` puts a border around it when it is [focused][] (the border of the `span` element).

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The first [focusable][] element is part of [sequential focus navigation][]. Its parent `span` puts a border around it when it is [focused][] (the border of the `span` element).
```

```html
<link rel="stylesheet" href="../test-assets/focus-visible/styles.css" />
<script src="../test-assets/focus-visible/script.js"></script>

<span id="indicator-act" class="indicator solid"></span>
<a
	id="act"
	class="no-focus-default"
	onfocus="toggleActivation('indicator-act'); toggleActivation('indicator-wcag')"
	onblur="toggleActivation('indicator-act'); toggleActivation('indicator-wcag')"
	href="https://act-rules.github.io/"
	>ACT rules</a
>
<span id="indicator-wcag" class="indicator solid"></span>
<a
	id="wcag"
	class="no-focus-default"
	onfocus="toggleActivation('indicator-wcag'); toggleActivation('indicator-w3c')"
	onblur="toggleActivation('indicator-wcag'); toggleActivation('indicator-w3c')"
	href="https://www.w3.org/TR/WCAG21/"
	>WCAG</a
>
<span id="indicator-w3c" class="indicator solid"></span>
<a
	id="w3c"
	class="no-focus-default"
	onfocus="toggleActivation('indicator-w3c'); toggleActivation('indicator-final')"
	onblur="toggleActivation('indicator-w3c'); toggleActivation('indicator-final')"
	href="https://www.w3.org/"
	>WCAG</a
>
<span id="indicator-final" class="indicator solid"></span>
```

### Failed

#### Failed Example 1

> The first [focusable][] element does not have any pixel changing color when it is [focused][] because the default styling has been overwritten by a style that removes the outline.

Reviewer: I would place the button in the sequential focus order (i.e. remove the negative tabindex) to make it clear that even if one of the elements pass the rule, it fails because all need to pass it

Author: I'm afraid that mixing Passed and Failed targets in the same test case will be messing up the implementation reports.
Currently, we expect one "failed" result for this test case. If we make the other one passing, we'd expect one "fail" and one "passed" result, and thus we also need to figure out which outcome is for which target in order to decide if the implementation is correct, and that makes automated implementations mapping harder, I guess…

Reviewer: That's fair

```html
<link rel="stylesheet" href="../test-assets/focus-visible/styles.css" />

<a class="no-focus-default" href="https://act-rules.github.io/">ACT rules</a>
<button tabindex="-1">Dummy button</button>
```

### Inapplicable

#### Inapplicable Example 1

This document contains no [focusable][] element.

```html
<span>ACT rules</span>
```

#### Inapplicable Example 2

This document contains only one [focusable][] element.

```html
<a href="https://act-rules.github.io/">ACT rules</a>
```

#### Inapplicable Example 3

> None of the [focusable][] elements in this document is part of [sequential focus navigation][].

Reviewer: ```suggestion
None of the [focusable][] elements in this document are part of [sequential focus navigation][].
```

---
id: oj04fd
name: Element in sequential focus order has visible focus
rule_type: atomic
description: |
  This rule checks that each element in sequential focus order has some visible focus indication.
accessibility_requirements:
  wcag20:2.4.7: # Focus Visible (AA)
    forConformance: true
    failed: not satisfied
    passed: further testing needed
    inapplicable: further testing needed
  wcag22:2.4.11: # Focus Appearance (Minimum) (AA)
    forConformance: true
    failed: not satisfied
    passed: further testing needed
    inapplicable: further testing needed
  wcag22:2.4.12: # Focus Appearance (Enhanced) (AAA)
    forConformance: true
    failed: not satisfied
    passed: further testing needed

>     inapplicable: further testing needed

Author: Note that this is currently not handled by the build. We'll need to grab WCAG 2.2 data, which is currently not done…

Reviewer 3: Yeah, I'd leave this off until we can do the full migration to WCAG 2.2.

---
id: oj04fd
name: Element in sequential focus order has visible focus
rule_type: atomic
description: |
  This rule checks that each element in sequential focus order has some visible focus indication.
accessibility_requirements:

>   wcag20:2.4.7: # Focus Visible (A)

Author: 🤔 
Actually, 2.4.7 is only level AA in WCAG 2.1 but will move to level A in WCAG 2.2.

Not sure how to handle that…

    forConformance: true
    failed: not satisfied
    passed: further testing needed
    inapplicable: further testing needed
input_aspects:
  - CSS styling
  - DOM tree
acknowledgments:
  authors:
    - Jean-Yves Moyen
---

## Applicability

The rule applies to any element which is part of [sequential focus navigation][] in a document with several [focusable][] elements.

## Expectation 1

> For each target element, there is at least one pixel whose color is different when the element is [focused][] and when it is not.

Author: I tried to be explain this.
It was surprisingly difficult to say "somewhere on the page", and I am still not sure what I picked is correct (notably for infinite scrolling pages like maps)…

## Expectation 2

> For each target element, and each other [focusable][] element in the document, the set of pixels whose color is different when the test target is [focused][] and when it is not, and the set of pixels whose color is different when the other element is [focused][] and when it is not, are different.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
For each target element and each other [focusable][] element in the document, the set of pixels whose color is different when the test target is [focused][] and when it is not, and the set of pixels whose color is different when the other element is [focused][] and when it is not, are different.
```

> For each target element and each other [focusable][] element in the document, the set of pixels whose color is different when the test target is [focused][] and when it is not, and the set of pixels whose color is different when the other element is [focused][] and when it is not, are different.

Author: I feel that the understanding document is strongly pushing toward unicity with sentences like:
> It must be possible for a person to know which element among multiple elements has the keyboard focus.

if multiple elements have the same focus indicator, it is not possible to know which among them has focus.

> - This Success Criterion helps anyone who relies on the keyboard to operate the page, by letting them visually determine the component on which keyboard operations will interact at any point in time.

uses singular "**the** component" none "some components, one of which has focus".

> - People with attention limitations, short term memory limitations, or limitations in executive processes benefit by being able to discover where the focus is located.

With short term memory, if you can't remember where on the page you are, you'll need focus indicator to be unique in order to be somewhat helpful.

---
I'd rather keep this expectation and add an assumption that unicity is required by WCAG.

> For each target element and each other [focusable][] element in the document, the set of pixels whose color is different when the test target is [focused][] and when it is not, and the set of pixels whose color is different when the other element is [focused][] and when it is not, are different.

Reviewer 3: > It must be possible for a person to know which element among multiple elements has the keyboard focus.

That's all well and good, but if it's not in the SC text, then it's not a normative requirement. I'm also not convinced this is something that actually happens. I've definitely never seen an issue like this. The only scenario I can come up with for this is the one above, where I'd believe this creates a false positive.

If you'd like to discuss this on an upcoming call, feel free to put the agenda item label on it, but I don't see a reason to change my vote on this.

**Note:** Some pixels might be the same, but the sets have to be unique for each test target.

## Assumptions

_There are currently no assumptions._

## Accessibility Support

There are no major accessibility support issues known for this rule.

## Background

WCAG does not have any requirement of how big or small focus indicator should be, or how far or near from the [focusable][] element it should be. Thus it is possible to pass this rule and [Success Criterion 2.4.7 Focus Visible][sc247] with barely perceptible changes at the other end of the page. That would however still be an accessibility issue. WCAG 2.2 is working on an extended Success Criterion 2.4.11 specifying how big the focus indicator should be. See the [Understanding Success Criterion 2.4.11: Focus Visible (Enhanced)][usc2411] proposal. All Examples in this rule are voluntarily avoiding very bad practices and thus avoid focus indications that are too small, too far away, too weak, …

> WCAG [Understanding Success Criterion 2.4.7: Focus Visible][usc247] explicitly states that "if there is only one keyboard actionable control on the screen, the success criterion would be met". Therefore, this rule only consider documents with several [focusable][] elements.

Author: While not technically normative, the Understanding document still says:
> The Working Group considers the content to be authoritative.

But sure, we can make an assumption that the Understanding document is correct.

		<option value="perceivable">Perceivable</option>
		<option value="operable">Operable</option>
		<option value="understandable">Understandable</option>
		<option value="robust">Robust</option> </select
	><br />

	<label for="level">Select a compliance level:</label>
	<input type="radio" name="level" value="A" id="a" /> <label for="a">A</label><br />
	<input type="radio" name="level" value="AA" id="aa" /> <label for="aa">AA</label><br />
	<input type="radio" name="level" value="AAA" id="aaa" /> <label for="aaa">AAA</label>
</form>
<button type="submit">Submit</button><br />
<span tabindex="0">Act rules</span>
```

#### Passed Example 2

The first [focusable][] element is part of [sequential focus navigation]. The set of pixels that change color when it is [focused][] (due to default User Agent's styling) is unique. The second [focusable][] element is not applicable because it has been removed from [sequential focus navigation][] due to the `tabindex` attribute. Its presence is nonetheless enough to make the first one applicable.

```html
<a href="https://act-rules.github.io/">ACT rules</a> <button tabindex="-1">Dummy button</button>
```

#### Passed Example 3

> The first [focusable][] element, is part of [sequential focus navigation][]. The set of pixels that change color when it is [focused][] (the border of the `span` element) is unique (it does not change when any other element is [focused][]).

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The first [focusable][] element, is part of [sequential focus navigation][]. The set of pixels that change color when it is [focused][] (the border of the `span` element) is unique (it does not change when any other element is [focused][]). The second element part of [sequential focus navigation][] also as a unique set of color changing pixels when [focused][].
```

```html
<link rel="stylesheet" href="../test-assets/focus-visible/styles.css" />

> <script src="../test-assets/focus-visible/script.js" />

Reviewer: ```suggestion
<script src="../test-assets/focus-visible/script.js"></script>
```

<span id="indicator" class="border">
	<a
		id="act"
		class="no-focus-default"
		onfocus="toggleActivation('indicator')"
		onblur="toggleActivation('indicator')"
		href="https://act-rules.github.io/"
		>ACT rules</a
	>
</span>
<button>Dummy button</button>
```

#### Passed Example 4

For each of these three [focusable][] elements, the set of pixels changing color when it is [focused][] is unique. For the element with `id` "wcag", each of these pixels also change color when another element is [focused][], but they do not all change color for the same other element. Thus, the set of pixels changing color is also unique for this one.

```html
<link rel="stylesheet" href="../test-assets/focus-visible/styles.css" />

> <script src="../test-assets/focus-visible/script.js" />

Reviewer: ```suggestion
<script src="../test-assets/focus-visible/script.js"></script>
```

<span id="indicator-act" class="indicator solid"></span>
<a
	id="act"
	class="no-focus-default"
	onfocus="toggleActivation('indicator-act'); toggleActivation('indicator-wcag')"
	onblur="toggleActivation('indicator-act'); toggleActivation('indicator-wcag')"
	href="https://act-rules.github.io/"
	>ACT rules</a
>
<span id="indicator-wcag" class="indicator solid"></span>
<a
	id="wcag"
	class="no-focus-default"
	onfocus="toggleActivation('indicator-wcag'); toggleActivation('indicator-w3c')"
	onblur="toggleActivation('indicator-wcag'); toggleActivation('indicator-w3c')"
	href="https://www.w3.org/TR/WCAG21/"
	>WCAG</a
>
<span id="indicator-w3c" class="indicator solid"></span>
<a
	id="w3c"
	class="no-focus-default"
	onfocus="toggleActivation('indicator-w3c'); toggleActivation('indicator-final')"
	onblur="toggleActivation('indicator-w3c'); toggleActivation('indicator-final')"
	href="https://www.w3.org/"
	>WCAG</a
>
<span id="indicator-final" class="indicator solid"></span>
```

### Failed

#### Failed Example 1

> None of these [focusable][] elements have any pixel changing color when they are [focused][] because the default styling has been overwritten.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
None of these [focusable][] elements have any pixel changing color when they are [focused][] because the default styling has been overwritten by a style that removes the outline.
```

> ```html
> <a class="no-focus-default" href="https://act-rules.github.io/">ACT rules</a>
> <a class="no-focus-default" href="https://www.w3.org/TR/WCAG21/">WCAG</a>
> ```

Reviewer: ```suggestion
```html
<link rel="stylesheet" href="../test-assets/focus-visible/styles.css" />

<a class="no-focus-default" href="https://act-rules.github.io/">ACT rules</a>
<a class="no-focus-default" href="https://www.w3.org/TR/WCAG21/">WCAG</a>
```
```

<a class="no-focus-default" href="https://www.w3.org/TR/WCAG21/">WCAG</a>

> #### Failed Example 2 The first [focusable][] element is part of [sequential focus navigation][] and has no pixel

Reviewer 3: Looks like you broke prettier

The first [focusable][] element is part of [sequential focus navigation][] and has no pixel changing color when it is [focused][]. The second [focusable][] element is not applicable because it has been removed from [sequential focus navigation][] due to the `tabindex` attribute. Its presence is nonetheless enough to make the first one applicable.

> ```html
> <a class="no-focus-default" href="https://act-rules.github.io/">ACT rules</a>
> <button tabindex="-1">Dummy button</button>
> ```

Reviewer: ```suggestion
```html
<link rel="stylesheet" href="../test-assets/focus-visible/styles.css" />

<a class="no-focus-default" href="https://act-rules.github.io/">ACT rules</a>
<button tabindex="-1">Dummy button</button>
```
```

#### Passed Example 1

> The first [focusable][] element is part of [sequential focus navigation][]. There is at least one pixel that changes color when it is [focused][] (due to default User Agent's styling). The second [focusable][] element is not applicable because it has been removed from [sequential focus navigation][] due to the negative value for the `tabindex` attribute. Its presence is nonetheless enough to make the first one applicable.

Reviewer 3: I don't think this "at least one pixel" phrase needs to be in these descriptions. We don't want to repeat the expectation. I think the following would be sufficient:

```suggestion
The first [focusable][] element is part of [sequential focus navigation][]. It gets an outline focused because of the User Agent's default styling. The second [focusable][] element is not applicable because it has been removed from [sequential focus navigation][] due to the negative value for the `tabindex` attribute. Its presence is nonetheless enough to make the first one applicable.
```

The same comment applies to other exampled.
